There are three possible operations on storage: read, write and execute. The concept of immutability relates to reading and writing storage, and provides limited information about execution: execution cannot lead to mutation of an immutable value. For functions and objects, it is useful to have more information about how execution may lead to mutation. Ballerina has a concept of isolation that provides this.

Objects have an isolated bit in addition to a read-only bit; an object value is isolated if its isolated bit is set. Mutable state is defined to be freely reachable from a value or variable if it is reachable without following a reference to an isolated object. A variable or value is an isolated root if its mutable state is isolated from the rest of the program's mutable state: any mutable state that is freely reachable from the isolated root is reachable from outside only through the isolated root. More precisely, if some mutable state s is freely reachable from an isolated root value r, then s is not freely reachable from a variable or value that is not reachable from r except by following a reference through r; similarly, if some mutable state s is freely reachable from an isolated root variable r, then s is not freely reachable from a value that is not reachable from r and is not freely reachable from any variable other than r. A variable can also be declared to be isolated. Ballerina maintains the invariant that isolated objects and isolated variables are isolated roots. Ballerina also guarantees that any mutable state freely reachable from an isolated object or isolated variable is accessed only within the scope of a lock statement, which ensures that there is no data race in accessing that mutable state. This implies that there will be no data race accessing any mutable state that is reachable (not just freely reachable) from an isolated object or isolated variable.

Functions and methods have an isolated bit in addition to a read-only bit; a function or method is isolated if its isolated bit is set. Ballerina guarantees that a call an isolated method or function will only result in access to mutable state if at least one of the following conditions applies:

- the mutable state is freely reachable from an argument passed to the function or method and the access happens on the strand on which the function is called; the object on which a method is invoked is considered as an argument for this purpose;
- the mutable state is freely reachable from an isolated variable or an isolated object;
- the mutable state is part of a new value created by the call.
- The caller of a function can thus ensure that a function call will not lead to a data race by ensuring that no data race is possible for the mutable state freely reachable from the arguments that it passes to the function, for example by passing only immutable values or isolated objects.