tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/README.md, before:

# Ballerina plugin for Visual Studio Code

[Ballerina](http://ballerina.io) makes it easy to build resilient services that integration and orchestrate across distributed endpoints. This plugin adds language support for Ballerina to Visual Studio Code.

## Quick start
- Download and install ballerina platform from [ballerina.io](https://ballerina.io/downloads/).
- Install VSCode plugin.
    - **Option 1.** Install this extension from the VSCode [marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=WSO2.Ballerina) (or by entering `ext install WSO2.Ballerina` at the command palette).
    - **Option 2.** Download and install the VSCode plugin manually.
        - Download `ballerina-vscode-plugin-VERSION.vsix` from [ballerina.io](https://ballerina.io/downloads/). When downloading make sure plugin version matches the platform version you have installed.
        - Go to Install from VSIX... command in the Extensions View command drop-down, or the Extensions: Install from VSIX... command in the Command Palette, and select the .vsix file to install. [More info](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/extension-gallery#_install-from-a-vsix)
- Configure  `ballerina.sdk` path in settings. ( This step is mandatory for the Ballerina VSCode plugin features to work ) 
To get to the settings in vscode use <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>,</kbd> in Windows and Linux and <kbd>⌘</kbd> + <kbd>,</kbd> in macOS. [More info](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/settings)

![set sdk](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/docs/set-sdk.gif?raw=true)


## Plugin Features

### Language Support

* Code completion : <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>SPACE</kbd>
* Go to definition 
    * Jump to source: <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>Click</kbd>
    * Open to the side with <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>ALT</kbd> + <kbd>Click</kbd>
* Go to symbol : <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>SHIFT</kbd> + <kbd>O</kbd>
* Find All references
* Hover Support
* Signature Help
* Rename

### Diagram View

Ballerina’s underlying language semantics were designed by modeling how independent parties communicate via structured interactions. Subsequently, every Ballerina program can be displayed as a sequence diagram of its flow with endpoints, including synchronous and asynchronous calls. 

To view the sequence diagram of a ballerina file press the diagram icon ( ![design view icon](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/docs/design-view-icon.png?raw=true) ) in top right corner.

![opening design view](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/docs/ballerina-diagram-usage.gif?raw=true)

### Debugger

#### Configuring the debugger

* Open a `.bal` file
* Go to the debug panel (Ctrl + Shift + D)
* Click on 'Configure or fix launch.json'

This will create a `.vscode/launch.json` file in your workspace, containing default ballerina debug configurations.

![opening debug config](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/docs/debugger-open-config.gif?raw=true)

There are two configurations with type `"ballerina"`. One with `"request"` set to `"launch"` and the other to `"attach"`. The second is used for remote debugging.

To launch the debugger, the path to the ballerina sdk needs to be configured. In the `"launch"` configurations add a new config named `"ballerina.sdk"` and provide the path to the sdk.

![setting ballerina sdk](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/docs/debugger-ballerina-sdk.gif?raw=true)

#### Using the debugger

* Add necessary debug points.
* Select 'Ballerina Debug' from the config menu. And do Debug -> Start Debugging.

![using debugger](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/docs/debugger-using.gif?raw=true)

## Contributing

If you want to help develop the ballerina vscode plugin or want to build from source and try out the latest features see [information for developers](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/docs/developer-info.md).


## License

Ballerina Visual Studio Code plugin source is available under the Apache 2.0 License.

## Copyright

Copyright (c) 2018, WSO2 Inc. (http://www.wso2.org) All Rights Reserved.

Commit message:

Update VSCode readme with value proposition

tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/README.md, after:

# Ballerina plugin for Visual Studio Code

The future apps we write increasingly depend upon programmable endpoints. The discipline of resilient communication between endpoints is integration. It is a domain of hard problems.

[Ballerina](http://ballerina.io) is a simple programming language whose syntax and runtime address the hard problems of integration. As a Turing complete language, Ballerina enables agility with edit, build, and run cycles. Ballerina code is compiled into services that include transactions, embedded brokers and gateway runtimes.

Ballerina makes it easy to build resilient services that integration and orchestrate across distributed endpoints. The Ballerina plugin includes intellisense, diagramming, debugging, code formatting, and refactoring.

## Quick start
- Download and install ballerina platform from [ballerina.io](https://ballerina.io/downloads/).
- Install VSCode plugin.
    - **Option 1.** Install this extension from the VSCode [marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=WSO2.Ballerina) (or by entering `ext install Ballerina.Ballerina` at the command palette).
    - **Option 2.** Download and install the VSCode plugin manually.
        - Download `ballerina-vscode-plugin-VERSION.vsix` from [ballerina.io](https://ballerina.io/downloads/). When downloading make sure plugin version matches the platform version you have installed.
        - Go to Install from VSIX... command in the Extensions View command drop-down, or the Extensions: Install from VSIX... command in the Command Palette, and select the .vsix file to install. [More info](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/extension-gallery#_install-from-a-vsix)
- Configure  `ballerina.home` path in settings. You should set the Ballerina platform installed path as `ballerina.home`. ( This step is mandatory for the Ballerina VSCode plugin features to work ) 
    - To get to the settings in vscode use <kbd>CTRL</kbd> +  <kbd>,</kbd> in Windows and Linux and <kbd>⌘</kbd> + <kbd>,</kbd> in macOS. [More info](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/settings)

![set sdk](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/docs/set-sdk.gif?raw=true)


## Plugin Features

### Language Support

* Code completion : <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>SPACE</kbd>
* Go to definition 
    * Jump to source: <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>Click</kbd>
    * Open to the side with <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>ALT</kbd> + <kbd>Click</kbd>
* Go to symbol : <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>SHIFT</kbd> + <kbd>O</kbd>

For a complete list of features please see the Ballerina Language Server [User Guide](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/language-server/docs/UserGuide.md).

### Diagram View

Ballerina’s underlying language semantics were designed by modeling how independent parties communicate via structured interactions. Subsequently, every Ballerina program can be displayed as a sequence diagram of its flow with endpoints, including synchronous and asynchronous calls. 

To view the sequence diagram of a ballerina file press the diagram icon ( ![design view icon](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/docs/design-view-icon.png?raw=true) ) in top right corner.

![opening design view](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/docs/ballerina-diagram-usage.gif?raw=true)

### Debugger

#### Configuring the debugger

* Open a `.bal` file
* Go to the debug panel (Ctrl + Shift + D)
* Click on 'Configure or fix launch.json'

This will create a `.vscode/launch.json` file in your workspace, containing default ballerina debug configurations.

![opening debug config](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/docs/debugger-open-config.gif?raw=true)

There are two configurations with type `"ballerina"`. One with `"request"` set to `"launch"` and the other to `"attach"`. The second is used for remote debugging.

To launch the debugger, the path to the ballerina sdk needs to be configured. In the `"launch"` configurations add a new config named `"ballerina.sdk"` and provide the path to the sdk.

![setting ballerina sdk](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/docs/debugger-ballerina-sdk.gif?raw=true)

#### Using the debugger

* Add necessary debug points.
* Select 'Ballerina Debug' from the config menu. And do Debug -> Start Debugging.

![using debugger](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/docs/debugger-using.gif?raw=true)

## Contributing

If you want to help develop the ballerina vscode plugin or want to build from source and try out the latest features see [information for developers](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/blob/master/tool-plugins/vscode/plugin/docs/developer-info.md).


## License

Ballerina Visual Studio Code plugin source is available under the Apache 2.0 License.

## Copyright

Copyright (c) 2018, WSO2 Inc. (http://www.wso2.org) All Rights Reserved.
